We've got Stevenson here.
Um, Anna Gold, nice to see you, Phil. We're in your hands.
You've got 10 minutes
as an organization, so we look forward to it.
No problem at all. So, uh, I'd like to thank the committee
for hearing our submission today.
Um, we've also got in the audience, uh, Rachel McKinney
and Paul Wheel and from Oceana Gold, and,
and I'm a, a partner at Deloitte representing them
as their tax advisor.
So our submission deals with a gap in the application
of the investment boost rules on mining infrastructure.
So the type of infrastructure I'm talking about, roads,
dams, tunnels, et cetera.
And the reason why we are submitting verbally today is
that it's a bit easier to sort of talk through the why.
Uh, we consider there's a bit of a gap in the rules
and verbally rather than in writing.
And I think I'll just start by setting the same.
So as we all know,
investment Boost provides an immediate 20% deduction on
assets that are commissioned in New Zealand.
Now, mines are a little bit different
to some other industries in that we have two types
of assets in a mine, we have our plant
and equipment, which is depreciated under ordinary tax rules
and eligible for investment boost.
So that's all very well understood.
And we also have our mining assets
and that's the, the infrastructure of the mine.
So predominantly land improvements, the roads, dams, tunnels
that I talked about earlier.
Now those assets are capitalized
and they're amortized over the life of the mine.
That, um, cost base of the mining
assets comes from two places.
So it comes from expenditure
that is incurred on assets built
after the decision has been made
to enter into commercial production.
Now that expenditure is capital expenditure
goes straight to balance sheet.
It's called mining development expenditure,
and it's currently eligible for investment boost.
But what we also have in our mining assets is there is also
expenditure on assets that are built
before the decision is made
to enter into commercial production.
So that's during what's called the exploration
phase of the mine.
Now, the expenditure on those assets
during the exploration phase is initially deductible in full
because there's uncertainty
around whether they will end up being a long
term asset or not.
If the mine's not viable, then
that deduction becomes permanent,
but if the mine is viable, so in other words,
the decision is made to box on with commercial production,
then that deduction's reversed.
The expenditure is treated as as income
and it is added to the cost base of the mine
and amortized over the life
of the mine in exactly the same way that that post, um,
decision to enter commercial production development
expenditure is amortized.
The difference though, uh,
from an investment boost perspective is that while
that expenditure is treated the same
as development expenditure, it is not included
in the definition of development expenditure and
accordingly is not included as a new investment asset
for the purposes of investment boost.
So it's not eligible for investment boost.
Now, the important thing here is
that there's actually no distinction between the types
of assets that are built during the exploration phase
and during the development phase.
The only distinction is the time of the mines lifecycle
that the expenditure hasn't occurred.
So just coming back to that road dams, tunnels example, so
the claw back expenditure that forms part
of the mining assets,
that is money spent on building these long term assets.
And the only reason why there's an a deduction immediately
is because it may be that the mine's not viable,
so there's no long-term benefit from it.
Uh, but the way that the rules work is they do recognize
that if, um, miners box on and,
and develop their mine, that those assets will be used
over the life of the mine.
And so accordingly it would be inappropriate for them
to have got a deduction in full right from the start.
A another way to put it is that if we didn't have this
specific provision that allowed deductibility,
it would just be capital expenditure
and when the asset was commissioned,
it would be eligible for investment boost.
It's just that there's a step in between that, um,
allows a deduction first.
So sort of to, to sum it all up, you know, um, our,
our submission just says that it's logical
that investment boost should apply to assets
that arise from clawback exploration expenditure in the
year that it's clawed back.
And that's for three reasons.
First of all, the money is spent on an
asset and that's important.
The second thing is that money spent on the same type
of asset post commercialization would be eligible
for investment boost.
And the third reason is that
because we are saying
that investment boost would only be able
to be claimed when the expenditure is called back,
that's consistent with the policy intent of investment boost
that you can only claim it when you commission the asset.
And that's the point that the, um, assets commissioned.
So that sort of, I suppose, sets out the why, uh,
behind our submission and,
and thank you to the committee for hearing it.
Well, thank you very much. Uh, um, Phil, um,
Rachel McKinney, have you got anything
to, to add at this point?
No, I think Phil has summarized it.
Okay. No, that, that's, that's fine.
We'll go to questions and you,
there might be something there for
you. We'll go to Deborah Russell.
Um, thank you for that. Um, sorry,
I'm not especially familiar with these provisions.
So, um, if you've got a mine
and you've got, um, expiration expenditure going on, sorry,
not a mine, a prospect I suppose.
Yeah. If you go ahead
and develop that mine, the expiration
of expenditure becomes part of the capital cost of the mine
and can be amortized, depreciated, um,
what happens if you do not go ahead with the,
if the expiration is fruitless
and you decide not to pursue further activity, what happens
to that expenditure at,
At that point the year it is deductible in full
even though, so what you have is if you have a a failed
investment Yeah, it's a hundred percent deductible.
Yeah. If you have a, um,
not a viable investment,
that's probably a better way to put it.
Sure. If you have a viable investment, then what happens is,
is that the previous cost ends up being reversed.
So you pay tax on the reversal of the exploration
of the expenditure, and then you, um,
then you amortize it over the life of the mine.
One of the, okay, um, we'll check with our officials.
One of the things that, um, became apparent
with investment boost is that, um,
a dead weight loss associated with it with, um,
commercial buildings.
So there was, um, it could be claimed for
and in fact other asset where the decision
to purchase had been made,
but the actual purchase hadn't taken place,
so happened particularly with
commercial buildings, that was a problem.
Yeah. Is this gonna be the case as well with this mine, some
of this mining development, uh, expiration expenditures?
Some of that would've been decisions that's already made.
So if you get the investment boost for it,
it would represent, you know, it's one of those things
that happens, a dead weight loss there. Yeah,
That's right.
I think, I mean, one way of looking at it is to say that,
um, part of the decision making is to we whether to go ahead
with commercial mining,
that's all done on a any present value basis.
So cashflow modeling
and early income, early cashflow savings are advantageous
to the decision to go ahead.
So if the spend was eligible for investment boost, then what
that would do that would improve the early stage cash flows
of the project, which, depending on how
viable the project was, so if it was extremely viable,
it would make no difference.
And you're absolutely right, it would be a dead weight loss.
If it was marginal, then it could be the difference
between going ahead at that particular point in time
or not. Yeah.
Okay. I guess, um, it's a policy issue really rather than
'cause the, the technical fix is gonna be straightforward.
Right. So we'll just have to have to ask, um, get officials
to talk to officials about that and see what
That's right. Yeah. Yeah.
Okay. Thank You. Okay, thank you Deborah.
We're gonna go to Ryan Hamilton.
Thanks, GIA. Um, just to clarify two quick things.
What you're seeking here is, I guess a, a broadening
of the current definition so
that your industry's captured in, in this
and the investment boost piece. Is that correct?
Uh, no, the, the industry's already captured and, um,
and any of the spend on assets
that are incurred
after entering into commercial production are
eligible for investment boost.
Uh, but what we have within the cost base
of those same assets is some expenditure
that has occurred earlier in the mine life
and so has previously been deductible
and then become non-deductible.
And at the moment that sits outside
of the investment boost rules.
Okay. Simply because of the way
that the mining rules are constructed in the act
and that it separates clawed back expenditure
from future development expenditure.
Okay. And can you just help articulate for me
what difference the investment boost piece gives you in
terms of marginal percentage versus the
current depreciation?
Amor amortization schedule?
A a lot of it depends on the life of the mine itself.
So there, there's two ways that the cost can be spread.
It can be spread on a year's basis
or it can be spread on units of production.
So for simplicity, I'll use the year's basis.
If you've got a, um, 10 year mine life,
then you'd deduct a 10% a year
and say you would get the first 20% up front.
If you've got a 20 year mine life, you know,
then obviously the upfront deduction has, um,
has more benefit to the miner
and that mine life is assessed on an annual basis,
so the amortization can even flow depending on the life
of the mine at any given point in time.
Thank you. Okay. Thank you.
Uh, we'll leave, we'll leave it at that.
Um, Phil and Rachel, thank you so much for submitting, uh,
to the committee this afternoon
and for your written submission.
No problem at all. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank
You. Thank you.
Right.
We're gonna go on to, um, Terry Voucher
and, uh, Terry welcome.
You've, uh, you've also got 10 minutes, uh, on, on behalf
of, uh, your consulting firm, so we look forward to it.
Sure. Uh, ki Han,
thank you very much for this opportunity to speak with you.
Um, background is and consulting firm.
We do a lot in the space of advising clients moving to
and from New Zealand
or New Zealand based clients who have overseas investments
that are in within the foreign investment fund,
or fifth regime and financial arrangements regime.
And you will have seen,
and I sent through earlier a diagram showing the, uh,
in foreign investment flow chart,
and I wanted to, I sent that through to the committee.
Uh, I can share that if that would help.
Yes, it would be great. Uh, yes. Okay.
I've just sent a request. Um, alright,
I think, just carry on, Terry.
Yep. So yeah, I'm just bringing it up to share.
Um, and it's on the left hand side here,
you can see the diagram showing what are the tracks
that have to be followed in terms
of different sorts of investments.
Now as you can see, it's a bit of a,
it's almost like a bowl of spaghetti.
It's been spilled on, uh, on the floor.
Um, and my point that I wish to drive out
and wish the, uh, tension for the committee is
that this is an area where people
with relatively modest means get fall into the regime.
And it's, it's
where I think there's substantial non-compliance
or under compliance in this area
because of the complexity of the regime.
So to the extent that the foreign investment, uh, regimes,
um, revenue account method has come in,
I'm cautiously optimistic of that
because it sort of records with people's understandings of
how a tax happens on a transactional basis.
The fifth regime, because it works on a deemed basis,
causes a great deal of confusion.
At any one time, we are dealing with at least one
or two, uh, voluntary disclosures to inland revenue
of under declared income in this space.
And so the fifth and the the fifth regime is one area.
The other area which is even more problematic is the
financial arrangements regime.
And, and I'm glad
to see the committee addressing the build addresses,
the issue of the thresholds.
Um, over here, the, the point here in which the stress is,
this is even more complex
and it applies to many people get caught on
foreign mortgages.
They've come here, they've kept a property overseas,
they've rented it out,
and they find that the exchange rate movement on the
mortgage gets taxed.
Now I've noted a couple of determinations,
these determinations, uh, you can see this book in here
and they're back to back, but the thing to note
for the committee is one dates from, uh,
24th of October, 1990
and the other one from 3rd of June, 2004,
and they refer to legislation which has now been subsumed in
one case, the 1976 Act and the other one to the 2019 94 act.
This is an area where a lot of work needs to be done,
in my view, to, uh, simplify the regime for ordinary people.
And what I would like to recommend strongly support
the proposal to move, uh, the thresholds up to, uh,
as, as in the bill.
But I'd like to propose that the section 50
EW 57 3, which act acts a
as a cal a deferral calculation, IU calculate the difference
between what would be payable under an accrual basis
or, uh, for accounting and a cash basis must be tracked.
That is something that's very difficult
for ordinary taxpayers to do,
and the threshold has been too low for too long,
and I would request that is removed for a threshold, um,
in full for people with a taxpayers with an income
of under $250,000.
I would also ask, and tying into the question I made about
non-compliance is I think these thresholds should be
increased with effect from the start
of the current tax year.
We are already doing that in relation
to the foreign investment fund revenue account method.
I don't see why we should not, um, do so for the, um,
these thresholds.
It's a compliance measure,
I think a relatively simplification,
and I think the loss
of revenue would almost be unquantifiable,
but improvement in compliance is not would be something, uh,
of benefit on the revenue fifth revenue account method.
Uh, the feedback I've had from clients is,
doesn't go far enough.
And if I may, I would like to quote from one client.
She came back to me, he said, um,
he said the government should think bigger and longer.
There's a vast wealth in the world
and New Zealand is a haven.
Those who amassed wealth obviously have relevant expertise
to start and grow companies or highly, technically competent
and are risk takers who know how to make savvy investments.
They want to invest long term.
The foreign investment fundraising is a bar to that
or a, a hindrance to that in the American context.
The tax credits is, there's a,
a highly technical issue about whether any tax paid in
relation to, um,
the fifth regime regime is creditable against any
US tax payable.
Um, we are into very deep weeds here, I'm afraid.
Apologies for this. This is what I call the, um,
quantum physics of the tax system.
It's highly detailed, highly complex,
but frankly not at all suited to capture.
It's captures too many people, um, who is technically
it's beyond their technical scope
or expectations in terms of compliance.
And I think if we are looking to attract people, we,
it's not just this all golden visa people we're talking
about people bringing over maybe, uh, 50, uh, so a couple
of hundred thousand dollars of savings
and this regime puts perhaps some in a compliance,
which I think is unjustified
and I'm happy to take questions now.
There's a loss in that there.
Okay, thank you Terry. We're gonna go to Deborah Russell.
Um, thanks Terry.
Um, and we've discussed the fifth regime before
and it's, um, complicated and difficult.
Look, um, I take your points with respect to that.
Um, one of the things that um, I was kind of puzzled by
when we got all the papers relating to the bill was
that there was no regulatory impact statement with respect
to these changes to the That's correct, isn't it?
Yes, yes. Yeah.
And I was, I was a bit puzzled by that
because, um, uh, officials have told us that the amount
of money involved is not particularly significant,
but from what you are saying it actually might be
because people don't really
understand what they're supposed to be doing.
Yes. Uh, uh, don't have it in front of me,
but someone did a very good, um, analysis of, uh,
obtained some excellent data under the Official Information
Act, and I will share it with the committee.
I'll email it through after this.
And they showed that the number
of taxpayers reporting fifth income was rising
sharply over the last three years.
That's partly because inland revenue has
expanded the tax return
to get more detailed reporting on the matter.
And so I think the number of taxpayers
who reported has nearly tripled in that time.
So there is more tax at stake
and income at stake here than perhaps
might have been led to belief.
But as I said, we regularly are reporting, um, uh,
on portfolios typically around, um, the 200
to $500,000 size,
which are maybe a hundred thousand pounds or or less.
Okay. Um, so the other thing I've sort
of just got here is the, the fifth regime.
Um, my understanding is that the people
who mostly get badly caught up by, uh, people
with US citizenship who've got these dual requirements
to report their income, um, are you, is in your experience,
are other people getting caught badly by the rules
as well from other nations?
Or is it just, is it a compliance issue for them
or is there a natural tax cost?
Um, for the Americans, it's the worst case scenario.
They have to do dual reporting on two different tax systems,
one of which is realization based.
That is a capital gains system,
and the fifth regime is not realized based mostly.
And so they have issues with the fact
that they are then reporting here
and paying higher tax relative to
what they would pay in the United States,
and they can't claim the credits on other jurisdictions who,
uh, for other people, the, the issue is around compliance.
They simply are not aware that these, uh,
requirements exist
because the portfolios,
they're not making many changes to them.
People are rather, um, lazy is not the right word,
but um, under manage share portfolios.
So they sort of tend to set and forget,
but they know if they make a sale they have to report it,
but that's a transaction.
Um, and it, many of the people I deal with come from
CGT jurisdictions
or transactional jurisdictions where something happens.
Yeah. We know we have to report something.
The fifth regime and the financial arrange regime
arrangements regime are completely counterintuitive to that
in that they are not transactional.
The, the liability
to tax arises even if you have not sold in the portfolio.
I had the worst case scenario, I came across with a client
who had an overseas mortgage, the exchange rate in Britain,
it moved and she had to tell her, well,
you've actually got $300,000 of income to,
uh, that's taxable.
And that was at 39%, nearly $120,000 of tax
the following year it moved back the other way.
So in midterms, she had not changed her position,
not repaid any mortgages,
but she'd had to pay $120,000 on an exchange rate
fluctuation, which she will never get back.
Okay. Alright. We, we, okay, thanks Terry. Thanks Terry.
We might just have to leave it there. Terry, thank you
so much for presenting.
Uh, thank you again to the committee for this time.
Yeah, thank you. Okay.
We've got a male cow here in Vinca Ramen
Be online.
Can I just ask the clerk something? Mm-hmm.
Yep. Please, Ryan, while we just get a more there
Submission on the submission that that one we're about
to do that seeking overseas Donie station
and they're asking the select committee to approve it.
Is that within scope? I would've thought there was an
an official, sorry, what page
Is that? On
Page one of the,
So the bill does have a clause around, um, entities
that are being recognized overseas donors.
Yes. But it's not for the committee
to approve whether they are or not.
Exactly. So, and I just thought that was, just wanted
to clarify That was a bit, you know, out of scope.
I will come back and Mr.
Carl, how are you, have we got Mr. Raman online as well?
No, we, you, you might be on mute. Oh, you are on
Mute? Yeah, sure.
Okay. Can you hear
Now? Here we
go, Cameron. Good afternoon. Here we go.
Oh wow. There you go. Good afternoon, Cameron. Okay.
Geez, I've never seen you online
before, so this is amazing.
Hey, welcome gentlemen.
We look forward to your presentation.
We've got a hard finish.
Sure. So get get into it.
Thank you, Mike. Thank you Cam. Sure.
Uh, good morning, uh, members of the committee
and, uh, thank you for the opportunity
to speak with you today.
I would like to take this opportunity
to highlight some points from our written submission.
ABA Charitable Trust is a New Zealand registered charity
dedicated to supporting communities living in extreme
poverty, primarily in India.
And over time we will support charities in
New Zealand as well.
We are here today to respectfully respect, uh, to request
overseas Tony status under this bill.
Our application was lodged with IRD in September 24.
We have since complied with the various directives
provided by the policy advisor to meet the requirements.
We have not sought any donations as yet, but our website
and payment portal are set up
and the trust will be launched at the upcoming Indian News
Link Business Awards later this month.
So why does this matter? At its heart?
This request is about fairness, compassion, and trust.
Millions overseas still lack necessities such as food,
clothing, clean water, and access to
health facilities and education.
See Doni status to creates a transparent,
well-governed channel, which ensures
that donors can receive the same tax benefits
for their general generosity
as they would when supporting a local charity
or other overseas charities which have this doni status.
The next question is why India?
Our initial focus is India
because our trustees have deep local roots
and longstanding relationships
with trusted NGOs on the ground.
Besides, as you well know,
the impact per dollar donated is extraordinary In India
as an ex, as an example,
just one New Zealand dollar can provide two nutritious meals
for an adult for a day.
Small contributions truly transform lives.
You will be partnering with well-established charities,
which have an excellent track record
of good governance practices.
Medical foundation is the first charity,
which was founded 25 years ago
by an American philanthropist,
which provides family-based care
for orphaned and abandoned children.
Apai will most likely be the second charity,
which was founded more than 50 years ago by Tom Holland,
the then Australian Council Council General in India,
which empowers families in urban slums.
The most important aspect
for any charity is obviously governance and oversight.
We have built a trust with strong governance
and zero administrative costs with help of volunteers.
So donations can go directly to the projects.
Our trustees include respected leaders from law, business
and media, people of integrity
who provide independent oversight and accountability.
All of the five trustees have lived in New Zealand
for some 30 to 40 years
and have contributed
to New Zealand charity initiatives.
We have reviewed audited financial statements from partners
will meet regularly with them
and conduct site visits to verify
that funds reach the intended beneficiaries.
Reporting cycles from our partners will be on a quarterly
or six monthly basis depending on the project being funded.
Funding is project specific
with clear outcomes agreed between the two parties.
Transparency is a principle we live by
and expect the same from the NGOs we will work with.
All agreements with the recipients will have a termination
clause, which can be exercised by our trust.
The heart of al, the word al in Sanskrit means
to feel another suffering as your own.
That's what drives us. Our guiding belief is simple.
Our life is life, everyone matters.
We see giving not as a charity,
but as a shared human duty, one
that uplifts both the giver and the receiver.
In closing members, we respectfully ask the
to grant overseas Tony status to charitable trust,
recognize a strong governance and transparent model,
and enable New Zealanders
to extend their compassion globally through a safe
and trusted charitable pathway.
With your support, we can turn compassion
into meaningful action.
If I may now just end on a small personal note.
I came to New Zealand from India nearly 40 years ago,
but I have not forgotten where I came from.
The faces of people who still dream are pet alive,
aha is my way
and our trustees' way of giving back,
of connecting the kindness of New Zealanders
with those who need it most.
Thank you members for your time
and for considering this request
with empathy and open hearts.
I would possibly, I would request a win it if you'd like
to add a few words and we'll then
be happy to take questions. Thank you so much.
Uh, thank you Mr. Ka.
Um, Vinke Raman that you've got anything to add?
Yeah, thank you. Thank you for the opportunity.
Kora Kaa, uh, my only prayer is that, um,
the trust has been established after much thought
after many years of interaction and the need.
And then we have identified the charity in India based
purely on the economic requirements of the recipients there.
And the Miracle Foundation
with whom we'll be working is also highly credible
organization and we in New Zealand are known
to be kindhearted people.
Where the help is needed is given, except
that in this particular case, we require
the official approval for various reasons.
I believe that, uh, we have, um, done due diligence due
and it's up to us, uh, to request you now to see
what can be considered further so
that this becomes a reality.
Okay, very good. Yep. We're gonna get to Deborah Russell.
Um, oh, Kate, nice to see you. And Amal.
Um, I think, I'm not sure that it's within the scope
of this committee's powers to do that,
but we can certainly ask, we might ask the officials to, um,
give us a bit of an update on where the request is at
and when it's likely to go to the minister of a sign off
so we can at least give you an update.
Um, or we could ask the min use some mechanism to do that
and we'll see how it goes from there. I think.
Yeah, no good suggestion, right?
Sure. Thank you gentlemen.
Congratulations on your, uh, thank you charitable trust.
Thank you for your presentation, vinca.
We're looking forward some, several
of us are looking forward to the Indian News Link, uh,
business awards on Monday the 24th, so all the best of with
that and indeed looking forward to it.
Uh, well done on your office upgrade too.
That's looking very smart. Thank you. Thanks, Kevin.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you.
Thank you all. Okay. Thank you so much. Thank you both.
Okay, now we've got PWC representatives here.
We've got, um, Sandy Lau and Chris Place. Thank you.
Thanks for coming in today.
Um, thank you to the committee for the opportunity
to present our submissions.
Um, very briefly, my name is Sandy Lau and I'm a partner
and the tax policy leader at pwc.
And I'm just based down the road here in Wellington.
Um, I am joined by Chris Place.
Um, Chris is a partner based in our Auckland office, um,
specializing in executive remuneration
and employee share schemes.
Um, given the limited time that we have with you today,
we would like to make some brief comments, um,
on the proposed RAM method and FBT changes
before, um, discussing our submissions on the ESS
proposals in a bit more detail.
In terms of the proposed RAM method,
we do appreciate the work that has been undertaken
to develop, um, a potential solution to address some
of the concerns that have been raised in regard
to New Zealand's ability to attract migrant investment.
However, we do consider more needs would need to be done to,
um, really increase New Zealand's um,
attractiveness to migrants.
While the current proposals do smooth out some
of the hard edges of the New Zealand tax rules, um,
in our view, we don't think it goes far enough
to make New Zealand more competitive.
Um, the main example, at the main example being the tax rate
that's applied, um, to the income
that will rise on the disposal
of any eligible RAM interests.
Um, we do note that there is a discount of 30%
of the total gain that's being proposed at the minute.
Um, but the likelihood is that the rest of the gain will,
um, probably be taxed at the top marginal tax rate,
which is currently at 39%.
So when you take that into account, um, this in
and in contrast to other jurisdictions that we compare
to ourselves to, for example, Australia, they would tax
that gain at 23.5%
or in the us um, where the top federal tax rate is 23.8.
So in some cases under the proposed RAM method, um,
and the individuals will most likely still pay more tax
as a result of moving to New Zealand, um, notwithstanding
that 30% discount.
Um, in addition, we have outlined in our written submissions
a number of changes that could be made in our view that, um,
that would make the proposed if it, uh, method more,
um, effective.
Um, and then very briefly, the other aspect of the bill
that I wanted to touch on
before handing over Chris is in relation
to the FBT proposals as a starting point, we want
to note our support for further changes
to the FBT regime generally.
Now, FBT is a very compliance heavy tax or businesses
and, um, we like to note
that the proposals contained in the officials issues paper,
um, would, in our view would go away to reduce some of
that compliance burden and our view.
Um, officials had done a pretty good job at setting out a
package that could have a meaningful impact on
reducing compliance costs for lots of businesses.
Um, it would be great to see that work progress
with more substantive, um, changes being made
to the FBT regime.
In terms of the proposed changes
that are contained in this bill, um,
we appreciate the change to ensure
that gift cards will be subject to FPT instead of PAYE.
However, um, the proposed change to have these, uh,
as classified benefits in our view would negate, um,
the compliance saving intention of the proposed changes.
Generally as the de mini, um,
exemption will no longer apply,
which means this could potentially bring a whole lot more
businesses into the FBT regime as, um, technically as soon
as they, uh, buy a gift card for one of their staff members,
they'll be required to return FBT on it.
As such, our submission is to have
that the minimum exemption continue to apply for,
um, gift cards.
I might hand over to Chris to pick up on the,
if there were no questions currently.
Oh, can I just, oh, you wanna go now? Yep.
Sorry, I just say that again for me, Sandy.
So it, there's, there's two ways you can get out of FBT.
One is the per employee per quarter threshold. Yep.
Um, so the gift cards wouldn't fall under
That. No. Because it's
now gonna be a classified benefit
that only applies for unclassified benefits.
Right. Okay. Thank you. Yep, Thanks.
Thank you members for, for hearing us on the ESS, um,
amendments, proposed amendments.
Um, this is an area I've been working in for
around about 18 years on a daily basis.
And, um, I, I've got about six
and a half minutes to convince you of what I believe
that these proposed changes are either at best,
fatally flawed, uh, perhaps I'd said worst, um,
or need significantly more work in order
to be, um, workable.
Um, now on the three key points I'd like to touch on are,
um, the deferral regime, which is proposed, um,
the unconditional right to presently receive shares,
which is a, a change in the taxing point and,
and the employer deduction.
Now on the deferral regime, um, this is, you know, from,
from our perspective and from the perspective
of our clients, this is an underwhelming, um, proposition.
Um, our clients, particularly in the, in the venture capital
and startup community, have been asking
for a concessionary regime, which enables them to compete
with our major trading partners, all
of whom have concessionary ESS regimes.
This proposal will not provide any concessions,
will not level the playing field,
and, um, does not do anything which cannot already be
achieved under the existing legislation.
Um, it is adding another, a layer of complexity
that will not shift the dial for our startup
and venture capital community.
Um, every jurisdiction that our,
our clients are competing in for talent Australia, the uk,
Canada, and the US have a concessionary regime.
Our VC and and startup community is very disadvantaged
by virtue of geography already by access to capital
by distance.
This is not an area we should be disadvantaged in.
We can really help them.
This is something we already can do.
Now we know that officials
who were considering these proposals had some really tight
parameters placed around them
that there were no concessions on the
table to be considered.
And we would, we propose, we submit that
that is something which needs to be looked at in order
for our, um, New Zealand Inc.
To be competitive on a global stage.
And we, and it is not hard to achieve
and we are very willing to work with officials in order
to assist them as we did with the 2018 legislation.
If this proposal remains, a lot more work has
to be done in order to make it fair and workable.
What we have to remember is these schemes are put in place
and employee share is put in place
and often the taxing point is 3, 4, 5 years later.
It needs to be really clear whether someone, whether a,
a scheme is subject to deferral or not.
And we suggest to officials that
as currently drafted it is gonna create confusion.
Um, and we need to look to the, the exempt ESS regime,
which has some pretty clear parameters as to
how you get into that regime.
There needs to be a contractual, um, it needs
to be a contractual term that you are gonna qualify
for referral in the documentation.
Um, and my proposal would be, our proposal would be
that there should be a notification
to the commissioner in the same way as the,
the exempt ESS regime works that way.
There can be no doubt this is a defer,
a deferred tax regime, um, scheme,
and there will be no, um, dispute seven
or eight years later when people are questioning when,
when it should be subject to tax.
Uh, a really surprising item in the, in the bill, um,
the unconditional right to presently receive shares
as being a taxing point.
Um, this took all of us in the tax community by surprise.
So what that's saying is that rather than beneficial
ownership, which is a foundation of our tax regime
or employee share schemes now,
rather than beneficial ownership at the point in time when
you receive an unconditional right
to presently receive shares, you'll be taxed then
not when beneficial ownership is transferred.
This is a fundamental change
to our policy settings in this area.
This beneficial ownership
and being the foundation
of our taxing point underpins our tax regime in this area.
This is a very, um, it's gonna result in a lot
of confusion because exactly how what that term means is,
is not clear at all from the legislation.
So other countries in around the world have a what's known
as a, um, vesting tax regime.
We have a beneficial ownership transfer tax regime.
This is gonna take us into a world which is somewhere
between those we are not exactly sure what it is
because it's not clear from the legislation
and it's only gonna apply to some schemes and not others.
We see complete confusion in this area
and that is really undesirable.
For example, just one example as
to whether an unconditional right to presently
see if shares arises.
If a company, if a vesting period has arrived,
directors have to pass a re a resolution to issue shares
and they have to sign a solvency certificate.
Can you say that an unconditional right
to receive shares has arrived, has arisen
before a solvency certificate has been issued.
We don't know the answer to that list
of companies are dealing with this,
these things on a daily basis.
Their share price is changing on a daily basis.
We see that this is gonna lead to confusion and, um,
and am ambiguity.
Our rules are already clear.
Um, and we propose, we submit
that a a better alternative would be
for those really small number of cases where you don't know
what the date of transfer of beneficial ownership is,
which is global schemes
where the parent company hasn't given local management
information to enable them to meet their obligations.
That there should be an alternative method
that you could use along the lines of what's proposed.
But as an elective option where you can't, can't use the,
the legislative method, Um,
the timing of the employer tax deduction is another.
Um, it's a law change.
It's not a clarification as it's being positioned.
Um, it's a complete reversal of the current law
and we cannot see any reason as
to why this is proposed at the moment.
Inland revenue's position is very clear.
The employer tax deduction arises at the same time
as the employee income.
Um, this reverses that and we don't know why.
Um, it's gonna lead to confusion.
It's gonna lead to problems particularly in the context
of a, of a transaction where you may have one, one group
of shareholders getting a tax deduction
and another group of shareholders carrying the tax cost on
the other side of the transaction.
We, we, I'll just, I'll just get you to wind it up. Yep.
Thank you. We, we submit
that this proposal should be earned.
Alternatively it, if a position is gonna be legislated
that the current position as outlined in IRDs, uh,
QB 2104 should be codified and rule.
Okay. Thank you very much. No, that was, um,
some very good pictures there, but within your six
and a half minutes as you said, I'm gonna go to Ryan, him.
Um, just a quick one around your comments
around concessions and
how we've missing an opportunity there in terms
of overseas, you know, traction.
Do you think there's scope for us to cut
and paste, you know, some overseas examples
or amend within in the scope of this, um, proposal to,
to introduce some of those things?
I think that'll be pretty hard within
scope of the best proposal.
Um, in terms of where the legislation is now, people have
to be, um, I think we got a lot more work done.
Okay. I can be reworked. It's a completely different regime.
Thanks Ryan. Um, Deborah Russell, I was
Gonna ask around those concessions as well
'cause it's kind of a policy decision rather than a,
a technical tax one, which is
what we can mostly deal with here.
So, um, we might just need to, um, ask officials
to take that away and consider it,
It, it, it is a policy decision. Yeah, absolutely.
Um, thank you. That was very technical,
So we'll Ask the officials to comment on it.
Yeah, thank you so much. Thank you. Thank you Chris.
Thank for Sandy. Okay, we've got Gail Duncan, um, St.
Peters on Willis Social Justice Group.
Gail of course is no stranger
to the select committee room, so nice to see you again.
Um, uh, Steven Jenkinson And Steven,
Thank you.
Right,
Uh, Koto Koto Qar.
Um, thank you Cameron Brewer for inviting us
to present the taxation Omnibus bill today.
Um, my name Gail Duncan
and I chair the social justice group.
We support revenue gathering by the government
through taxation, applying to a broad spectrum
of wealth creation opportunities from wages
and salaries to capital assets and transfers.
Revenue gathering should be fair with all
of society making contributions at presence tax collection
and monitoring of assets
and incomers unfairly weighted on beneficiaries
and those on low wages.
This bill seems to reduce the opportunity
for the government to gather revenue.
Instead, the bill expands the opportunity to monitor
and scrutinize those applying for
or receiving welfare while permitting those with wealth
to bypass scrutiny in the name of reducing compliance costs.
Our submission focuses on the repeal of section 17
gv and secondly, information sharing by way
of ministerial agreement.
The new section 18, HB regulatory disclosure
to government agency section 17 GB
allows the commissioner of inland revenue
to request information that lends greater weight
to the sourcing of sufficient information across the
spectrum from low to high wealth
to support policy development.
Inland revenue, as I understand, has only used section
17 GB once to gather information
for the high wealth individual's research project
during 2020 2 23.
The reason given by the minister for his preference
to repeal section 17 GB
is this would best address taxpayer concerns about privacy
and compliance costs.
It is not clear which taxpayers were concerned.
The social justice group is concerned
that IRD will no longer be able
to collect information about trusts,
who is settling assets on trusts,
who is getting the benefits and how income
and assets are flowing through trusts.
The inland revenue regulatory impact statement advises
that a targeted con consultation took place
with eight stakeholders from the private sector, um,
interest groups and academics.
It was not open to the public
and the report is not available.
The social justice group supports retaining Section 17 GB
to ensure continuation of policy development
by inland Revenue Building on high wealth individuals re
research project that was published in 2023.
We also request that the consultation report,
including the names of stakeholders, is made available
and time permitted for full consideration of this
by the public before the bill goes any further.
The other aspect we have concerns about is information
sharing by way of ministerial agreement.
The new section 18 b HB titled Regular Disclosure
to Government Agency, which permits the commissioner
to disclose sensitive revenue
information on an ongoing basis to the chief executive
of a government agency.
Um, particularly section a de determining entitlement to
or eligibility for government assistance.
This is the complete opposite of the repeal of section 17 gb
and that the most vulnerable,
those seeking welfare assistance when they have need will
have no protection of their information.
One rule for the rich to preserve privacy
and reduce any inconvenient compliance costs associated
with compiling information.
And one for the poor setting criteria for greater scrutiny,
removing privacy and disregarded disregarding the extensive
compliance costs that will occur.
Um, with this outcomes for the ordinary person is
that fewer of us will be prepared to engage
with government services including health services
and fear of re retribution if there are any
complications in life.
The social justice group is con also concerned
that on this particular portion there was no consultation at
all on this change.
Only the privacy commissioner was informed,
who raised concerns that mechanisms
to share information already exist
to ensure voluntary compliance with the tax system.
Confidentiality of taxpayers affairs is critical.
It is imperative that this disclosure
of information provision is removed.
In our opinion, the government's policies are already doing
a lot of harm to New Zealanders who are bearing the burden
of unemployment and shrinkage of our economy.
Focus should not be on micromanaging benefit entitlement,
but increasing productivity
and engaging with unions, workers, super annuitants carers,
the children that are affected
and the communities at large to close.
If the outcome of this bill is passed, the outcome
of this bill if passed is we will no longer be able
to track wealth in our country.
People with wealth will hide it with impunity,
removing financial resources
for the economy while the majority are subjected
to unnecessary and disproportionate eligibility scrutiny
nor Koko 10. Are there any questions?
Yeah, thank you Ga. Um, make
It quick. Look. Thank you. I'm
in Deborah sympathy with that
and I see the tension there
between those provisions as they're written.
You also mentioned another tension
around people having a right to privacy
and of course that was one of the problems that a lot
of people had with 17 GB when it was introduced.
Mm-hmm. Um, would you support the officials had it, they,
um, officials recommended in the, uh, retaining 17 GB
but added privacy protections.
Is that something you could support? Um,
Well as should it wasn't G might run wrong call.
I just think sections, we think section 17 gb we did notice
that should just be retained
because you are taking privacy, you're taking, um,
provisions away in the, um, the other area, which is, um,
section 18 hb.
Yeah. So as far as we can see there,
there should be no change to 17 GB
and, um, the new section 1718 HB needs
to be removed.
And, um, furthermore that yes, it just needs to be removed,
but obviously there would be consultation processes,
neither, in neither case if there being, you know,
adequate consultation processes,
which concerns us greatly. Okay.
Thank you. Thank You Gail. Thank you Steven.
Thank you members and members of the public and, and,
and officials and submitters our taxation 25 26 bill.
Hearings will continue next Wednesday, so thank you.
Bye.